Planting trees under overhead utilities should be avoided. However, in some cases, an
overhead utility is not located within an easement (or a public right-of-way). In these
cases, it is recommended that tree plantings have a minimum setback of 30 feet from
the centerline of an overhead utility. If a tree needs to be planted within this
recommended set-back, only tree species approved for use under power lines should be
planted. Plants should not be placed where they will block or interfere with the operation of site
features and utilities. Location of plantings near utilities such as those associated with
fire safety, site lighting, water and sewer connections, and electrical access can result in
violation of other City and County Code and Ordinance requirements. Therefore, the
designer should show the location of all proposed utilities to verify that there are no
conflicts with either underground or above-ground utilities. City, County and State
departments and agencies that review site plans will comment on plant location
proposals which violate their design manuals and ordinances. On planting plans, site
utilities can be shown as half-toned to make it easier to see the proposed plantings, and
their relationship to the utilities. Avoid conflicts between trees and site lighting. 
Tree shadows can interfere with lighting performance, which could result in a violation of UDO utility requirements. Pruning of
the obstructing trees could result in the loss of an Ordinance-required tree, resulting in
possible violation of the Ordinance. To avoid such conflicts, the site designer should
provide a minimum 15 foot horizontal clearance from the tree-trunk center to the
center point of overhead lighting elements. If a fastigiate or columnar tree species is
used, the required horizontal clearance can be reduced to a minimum of five feet.Show location of proposed 
irrigation lines and sprinkler heads (if proposed). Protection of Existing Vegetation, areas of vegetation to
be preserved in order to meet Ordinance requirements shall not be disturbed or
encroached upon. The minimum size of the “Tree Preservation Area” shall be the area within the root
protection zone (RPZ) of the tree or group of trees to be preserved. Additional area
can be preserved. When installing tree protection fencing for preserved trees along a wood’s edge, the
fence shall be located at the edge of the RPZ of the outermost-protected trees, and
on the wooded side of any silt fencing to be installed in the same location. Using silt
fencing, or combining tree protection and silt fencing into one fence, is prohibited
for tree protection. Trees with more than a third of their roots pruned or removed are unlikely to
survive. Root pruning implements can be anything from a sharpened shovel, loppers,
pruning saw, pavement saw, or similar sharp cutting tool. Circumstances and
availability will dictate which tools will be best fit for the pruning application. Most
vibrating plows, stump grinders, pavement saws and sharp hand-tools can be
acceptable as long as the root is cleanly cut, and not mashed or torn. Most plants prefer a moist, well-drained soil. However, provided a plant is
otherwise healthy, has had time to become established (normally one to two
years after planting), and is provided appropriate cultural conditions (adequate
soil drainage and aeration, mulch, moderate to low fertilization, proper pH,
appropriate light level, etc.) those plants indicated as drought-tolerant should
be able to survive a moderate period of limited moisture (rainfall, irrigation).
Drought-tolerance does not mean the plants prefer hot, dry weather or that
they will not be adversely affected by extended dry weather. High temperatures
and wind, heat and light reflection from nearby hard surfaces, and high
fertilization can increase the potentially damaging effects of low moisture on
plant growth and survival. Fall-planted trees and shrubs have demonstrated an
increased ability to survive moderate moisture levels compared to those
transplanted in the spring or summer. Plants should be free from defects, disfiguring knots, sunscald injuries, frostcracks,
abrasions of the bark, plant diseases, insect eggs, borers, fire ants, and
all forms of infestation. Plants showing evidence of congestive, strongly circling roots (indicative of
future weak root growth and poor plant performance) shall not be accepted. Trees which are adaptable to urban conditions and smaller
planting areas between the street and building(s); especially
suitable for use in engineered planting areas and restricted
spaces having pavement encroaching on the growing area. Typically, shrubs adaptable to poor soil conditions and
restricted growth areas; tolerant of pollution and possible
(road) salt conditions; and tolerant of reflected heat from
increased pavement and building surfaces. Other shrubs
noted in the tables with an asterisk (*) can be used in urban
conditions if it is demonstrated that growing conditions
appropriate to the species proposed are provided. Where several plants will be spaced close together, they should be planted in one
larger bed in order to allow for sharing of root space and amendment of all the soil
in that bed. All groundcovers and container shrubs should be planted in a shrub bed
(see Figure 3, Recommended Shrub Planting Detail). Balled and burlapped material,
or large container material, can be planted in individual planting holes. The planting
area should be wide enough to accommodate all roots without crowding, and
contain nutrient-rich soil. Dig all shrub beds two to three times the width of the root mass and all tree
planting holes a minimum three times the width of the root ball in highly compacted
or clay soils, or two times the width of the root ball in all other soils, with a
minimum of nine inches on each side of the root mass or ball for shrubs and 12
inches for trees. Tree planting holes should be wider at the top with tapered sides.
This can be accomplished by digging with a large auger to the required depth; and
then breaking down the sides with a shovel to eliminate glazing, transferring the
material to the low side of the slope and creating the preferred slope. The sides of
the pit may be scarified if needed. Avoid creating smooth or “glazed” sizes of the pit.
The bottom of the hole should be flat and firm to prevent settling; do not dig.  