 T HE construction of an adequate esthetic depends upon analyses
 of esthetic situations. We shall here defend the thesis that
 "quality theories" of beauty do not measure up to this standard, by
 attempting to show: (1) that the simplest form of the quality theory
 affords no differentiation between beauty and ugliness; (2) that the
 resulting paradox is not resoluble in terms of the relation which the
 "tertiary" or expressive quality bears to its object; (3) that the
 paradox is not resoluble in terms of the intrinsic nature of the
 tertiary quality, and that although pleasure and displeasure, as
 qualities, may seem to resolve the paradox, these are not qualities,
 but relations, leading (4) to the development of a "relational"
 esthetic.
 The simplest formulation of the tertiary-quality theory asserts
 that the expressive quality is an attribute of the object. Mind does
 not impute beauty to the thing; its function is simply to recognize
 or apprehend the beauty which the thing possesses in its own right.
 Beauty is a quality, which we do or do not recognize (apprehend,
 perceive, intuit). The process of recognition does not constitute or
 alter the beauty of the object. Hence, whether or not we recognize
 it as such, the beauty is there. To drop the term "tertiary quality"
 may simplify the argument, for whether it commonly means merely
 the expressive quality or the primary-secondary-expressive quality,
 I can not say. But if we consider beauty to consist of the so-called
 primary and secondary qualities together with their expressive
 quality, the meaning is less ambiguous and more tractable. Let us
 suppose, then, that beauty is precisely these three orders of qualities
 taken together, and observe where the supposition leads us.
 If beauty is taken to be any object which has an expressive
 quality as well as primary and secondary qualities, apparently all
 such objects must ipso facto be beautiful. But these qualities alone
 can not identify beauty, for ugly objects must also have all these
This content downloaded from 130.39.62.90 on Mon, 19 Nov 2018 17:48:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 METAPHYSICS OF BEAUTY 597
 qualities. Ugliness, of course, must not be taken to mean what
 Bosanquet calls difficult beauty, a conception which is entirely ir-
 relevant to the theory at hand. For if beauty is a quality, it is
 wholly independent of psychological conditions of recognition, and
 therefore wholly independent of the spectator. Our argument pro-
 ceeds, then, upon the assumption that ugly objects exist. To the
 legitimacy of this assumption we now turn.
 Ugliness is something. And it is something more than so-called
 primary and secondary qualities, for the same reason that beauty is
 more than primary and secondary qualities. These are percepts (or
 percepta) simply, neither ugly nor beautiful. As Bosanquet asserts,
 if the object has no expressive or plastic form, for esthetic purposes
 it is nothing.' So much is clear. But Bosanquet's conclusion, that
 all objects having plastic form belong to the beautiful, has been, I
 think, effectively discredited. Mrs. Gilbert characterizes the fault
 of the generally disliked strongly-saturated pink and the "Let a
 little sunshine in" religious hymn as lying "in the cleft between
 pretension and performance. " 2 The pink, trying unsuccessfully
 to be a pretty color, and the religious music, failing to be religious,
 have, to be sure, expressive qualities, but not beauty. L. A. Reid
 even declares that there need be no pretension in the "unrelieved
 ugliness" of the slum areas of great industrial cities. "In some
 cases these grim and dreary buildings are relatively expressive of
 what they are, of their own values. It is what they express that we
 can not abide." 3 In the examples cited, an opponent might protest
 that we have mistaken the conventional or symbolic for that which
 is genuinely objective. He might urge that ugliness is really objec-
 tive only if we can show that it exists in nature. For in nature there
 is no pretension: things are what they are and express what they are.
 To avoid needless argument, let us assume the validity of this con-
 tention, and see whether or not we can show that ugliness does-or
 may, upon the basis of the theory in question-exist in nature.
 In some instances nature certainly app
 598 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY
 pleasing perhaps as freaks in nature, has only the esthetic quality
 of freaks. And if freaks are not ugly, the term is unmeaning.
 Arguing hypothetically, we can reasonably assert that if beauty
 can be attributed to nature, so can ugliness. Moreover, the quality
 theory is just as applicable (or just as inapplicable) to nature as
 to art.4 If beauty is defined as a quality, ugliness, likewise, should
 be so defined. And to both beauty and ugliness psychological con-
 siderations are irrelevant, otherwise the quality theory collapses.
 It could be only an ad hoc argument which declares that beauty is
 objective, but ugliness dependent upon our frail sensibilities or upon
 an unesthetic attitude. In conclusion we say, then, that ugliness,
 according to the quality theory, is a quality of an object; that beauty
 has no priority over ugliness; and that if beauty belongs to some
 things in their own right, ugliness by the same token belongs to other
 things in their own right.
 But in establishing this conclusion we have renounced any cri-
 terion by which to distinguish the ugly from the beautiful. Both
 beauty and ugliness are defined simply in terms of an object which
 has an expressive quality. Both are values, and although we sup-
 pose one to be positive and the other negative, we have no means of
 differentiating them. Ugliness, like beauty, is simply the expressive
 quality of the object. Anything which may be objectively pred-
 icated of beauty may analogously be predicated of ugliness. Thus
 we seem to be at a deadlock. Formally considered, one or two
 answers may be proposed as a solution of the problem. The beau-
 tiful may be differentiated from the ugly either (1) by virtue of the
 way in which the expressive quality is related to the primary and
 secondary qualities, or (2) by virtue of intrinsic differences in the
 expressive quality itself. We must consider each of these alterna-
 tives.
 II
 Perhaps some one will say: the beautiful is that which is satis-
 factory, or which satisfactorily expresses its intrinsic quality; the
 ugly is that which is unsatisfactory, or which fails to express its
 intrinsic quality. The beautiful depends upon a relation between
 the expressive quality and the primary and secondary qualities-
 viz., the relation of the latter satisfactorily to express the former.
 The ugly depends upon the relation of unsatisfactory expression.
 The deadlock persists. For satisfactoriness or unsatisfactoriness has
 no meaning for a relation which, objectively constituted, is what it
 is. How an object which actually has an expressive quality can be
 4 I am not here concerned with the nice problems as to whether beauty of
 nature and of art are structurally the same. Suffice it to show that on the
 " quality hypothesis" ugliness as well as beauty may exist in both nature and art.
This content downloaded from 130.39.62.90 on Mon, 19 Nov 2018 17:48:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 METAPHYSICS OF BEAUTY 599
 said to have it either satisfactorily or unsatisfactorily related to its
 other qualities is an academic question which the keenest academi-
 cian could not answer. If an object has an expressive quality, it has
 it. To say that it has it satisfactorily or unsatisfactorily, without
 reference to mind, is to say nothing.
 We are all familiar with the difficulties arising from an attempt
 to state the relationship of secondary to primary qualities. Locke's
 proposed solution has long been discarded. And, in general, we can
 neither reduce secondary to primary qualities, nor can we state what
 the relationship is. Precisely the same difficulties arise in attempt-
 ing to explain the relationship of an expressive quality to its object.
 To use the term "express" to designate the relationship seems wholly
 out of place. We seem committed to the position that expressive
 qualities simply do or do not exist. But ugly objects, we have tried
 to show, must have an expressive quality. Consequently, upon the
 view that the expressive quality belongs to the object in its own
 right, we find that we can not distinguish the beautiful from the
 ugly on the basis of the relation which the expressive quality bears
 to the object. The proposed solution is analogous to an attempt to
 differentiate blue and red on the basis of their having differing rela-
 tions to primary qualities. As color is related to form, so the ex-
 pressive quality is related to both. Since the theory assumes that
 this quality exists as a property of the object, beauty and ugliness
 equally would exist as properties of the object; but their respective
 expressive qualities have identical relations to the object, and no
 objective differences in relation are detectable.
 No relation between the expressive quality and the object, we
 conclude, can make intelligible the distinction between beauty and
 ugliness.5 Accordingly, ugly art, ugly patterns, and ugly natural
 objects would be indistinguishable from beautiful art, beautiful
 patterns, and beautiful natural objects. To avoid this insufferable
 paradox, we are forced to further formulations of the tertiary-qual-
 ity theory: those which distinguish beauty from ugliness by virtue
 of the intrinsic nature of the expressive quality itself.
 III
 The first question to be answered is: Are there some qualities
 which are per se beautiful, and some which are per se ugly? It is
 5 Although I have argued that the relation of satisfactory or unsatisfactory
 expression can not be the differentia of beauty and ugliness, I have concluded
 that no relation between the qualities can be the differentia. This conclusion
 appears warranted, for I think I have taken the most plausible relation con-
 ceivable. Accordingly, I feel justified in throwing the burden of proof upon
 whoever would deny the propriety of drawing the universal conclusion.
This content downloaded from 130.39.62.90 on Mon, 19 Nov 2018 17:48:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 600 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY
 difficult to know precisely what is meant by an "expressive quality."
 So far, we have seen that it can not be any of the so-called primary
 or secondary qualities, for the apprehension of these is mere per-
 ception. It is, then, some further characterization of the object; but,
 as a quality, it is just as real as any other which is apprehended
 in the flux of experience. It is a quality "supervening upon" this
 flux in some particular situation, a quality having its own distinct
 identity. Its apprehension is perhaps better called intuition, to
 distinguish the transaction in the esthetic experience from mere fac-
 tual perception. But however complex this transaction in the es-
 thetic experience, still the quality itself has a simple identity. And
 thus it has a defined nature whenever or however it appears as be-
 longing to an object.
 There are, apparently, innumerable expressive qualities, each with
 its own identity. If, however, beauty and ugliness are meaningful
 terms, they must be applicable to these qualities. Hence we must
 ask which of these are beautiful, and which ugly. But the question
 is unintelligible, or at least unanswerable. Assuming that these
 qualities do exist, we can make the trivial judgment that they do
 exist, and that each quality differs from every other. But what more
 do we add by predicating of them beauty or ugliness? Clearly, this
 further predication is redundant, for it means only that these ex-
 pressive qualities do exist. If we ask what do we mean by beauty
 and ugliness, except for the expressive qualities which exist, we are
 silenced. We discern no ear-marks by which we can call certain of
 them beautiful, others ugly. Accordingly, some further definition
 is needed. For surely, when we ask whether something is beautiful,
 we are not asking merely whether it has an expressive quality.
 In view of the need for further definition it may be suggested
 that there is a specific quality by which we can recognize a thing's
 beauty-viz., the delight we feel in an object. Now we have tacitly
 assumed that delight, pleasure, satisfaction, or however we signify
 the affective aspect of the esthetic situation which these terms denote,
 is not a quality. Yet as I understand esthetic nominalism, it con-
 troverts this assumption. Beauty is conceived to be a quality set
 up by processes of the trained mind in response to the object. That
 the esthetic experience is distinguished by its disinterested con-
 templation of determinate qualities and forms, that beauty is not
 mere caprice, that it is a quality which the instructed mind can
 intuit, appears to be a fundamental tenet. Delight as an objective
 quality then becomes the differentia of beauty.
 Ostensibly, this modification appears to resolve our paradox. If
 delight or satisfaction in a thing is beauty, then disgust or dissatis-
 faction is ugliness. But although the paradox is resolved, a fresh
This content downloaded from 130.39.62.90 on Mon, 19 Nov 2018 17:48:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 METAPHYSICS OF BEAUTY 601
 difficulty springs up, namely, evidence which challenges the notion
 that delight or disgust is a quality of objects. But before criticizing
 this notion it is well to clear up some possible ambiguities of the cur-
 rent nominalistic view. Then we can perhaps more judiciously say
 whether beauty is a quality or in what respect it involves qualities.
 (a) If beauty is the quality of delight, it is certainly unanalyzable.
 Thus, it can not have qualities, for these could be distinguished
 from one another., If delight is a quality, beauty might be this
 quality simply. Yet such a theory would ultimately prove un-
 tenable, for it is the hedonistic error, which leaves the object wholly
 out of account. Unfortunately, space here forbids a criticism of
 this "subjectivistic" error.
 (b) Neither can we contend that the "delightful object" as a
 quality is what we mean by beauty. For, in the first place, we still
 have the so-called primary and secondary qualities; and no matter
 what names we give them, we must distinguish them from any
 "supervening quality." Thus, if beauty is a quality, we would be
 forced to deny that analysis of art can disclose any of its sensu-
 ous or formal constituents. Since if anything is established in
 philosophical lexicography, surely it is that qualities are simple,
 undifferentiated, unanalyzable, and without aspects. The "delight-
 ful object" would have all these primary and secondary qualities
 and the quality of delight, as well as the relations which subsist be-
 tween them. But this formulation of the qualitative view denies the
 possibility of analysis. Consequently, if we can not establish the
 various relationships which art-analysis attempts, the whole notion
 of art-criticism is a sad, misdirected preoccupation.
 (c) For similar reasons we can not logically contend that beauty,
 in any strict sense, is a tertiary quality. To say that beauty emerges
 as a tertiary quality does not get rid of the analyzable aspects of
 beauty, which, though necessary, are not per se beautiful. The so-
 called primary and secondary qualities remain, together with the
 relation of supervention which they bear to the expressive quality.
 Accordingly, a strict tertiary-quality theory is in direct contradic-
 tion to the notion that beauty can be analyzed. As above formu-
 lated, it is, at best, grounded upon an ad hoc hypothesis, which
 posits a specific quality, different and apart from the analyzable
 object. Besides inviting its own peculiar criticisms, such an hy-
 pothesis involves all the fancifulness and confusion of an emergence
 theory.' All the analyzable aspects of beauty remain, and further
 confusion arises by the addition of a superfluous. unintelligible
 6 For criticism of the emergence doctrine I am indebted to Professor G.
 Watts Cunningham 's " Emergence and Intelligibility, " International Journal
 of Ethics, Vol. 39, 1929.
This content downloaded from 130.39.62.90 on Mon, 19 Nov 2018 17:48:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 602 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY
 quality. Thus we are led to the following dilemma: either we must
 assert the proposition-which experience utterly fails to substan-
 tiate-that the object has nothing whatsoever to do with beauty; or
 we must recognize that beauty as a "tertiary quality" involves
 elements or qualities, as well as the relations between them, from
 which the new quality emerges. But since the contention does
 appear warranted that beauty has distinguishable aspects-for ex-
 ample, that form is not color, and color not delight-we are forced
 to the final formulation of the quality theory, in which place is
 made not merely for the various orders of qualities, but also for the
 relation of the object to mind: delight is merely a quality of the
 complex object which we designate as beautiful.7
 Formally considered, we may say that delight or satisfaction is
 a quality of beauty. But in the analysis of beauty, as in most
 philosophical disciplines, we hope to deal with fact, and not sheer
 theory. Consequently, we must inquire into the propriety of call-
 ing delight or satisfaction a quality of the object. Delight seems
 explicable only in terms of a subject-object relation. At the outset
 we suggested that beauty should be thought of as a type of conscious
 experience. Delight belongs to the experience-not to either of the
 terms, but to the terms-as-related. The relationship is complex; but
 it involves, among other things, a process or activity which we may
 designate as delight."
 If, then, delight is the criterion of beauty, repulsion is the
 criterion of the ugly. But can repulsion be given any meaning
 apart from an individual who is repelled from an object? The
 question is one of fact, and is difficult to argue. Yet I feel sure
 that one who seriously entertains the notion can conceive it only in
 terms of a subject-object relationship, and that any explanation of
 ugliness is always in terms of repulsion or dissatisfaction as involv-
 ing this relation. The relational view does not force one to assert
 that dissatisfaction belongs either to the subject or to the object.
 On the contrary, it commits one to the assertion that ugliness can
 exist only where there is a subject-object relation. Dissatisfaction
 is not in me, nor is it in the object, but I am dissatisfied with the
 object. The case for the ugly is clear. It is not quite so clear for
 the beautiful, but for a good reason. In the beautiful I am satisfied
 7 It is to be noted that when (b) and (c) supra are analyzed, they are not
 strictly qualitative, but involve the relation, already considered, between tertiary
 quality and the object. This is an inescapable ambiguity. The real issue, as I
 see it, is whether the differentia of beauty and ugliness is a quality-the subject
 discussed in the following.