Storms are blown on the horizon. Shape shifting, always moving closer and farther away. Light is thrown through the holes of thick grey clouds. Glimmering off of houses that perspire through generations of shiney colored paint. The color allows these structures to poke, inflate, and make the bones completely bored. I know that if these houses would get another layer of color then I could see them again fried with the walls of this gray. 
The storm is scattered far on the horizon. Deformation, always getting closer. Light is poured out through the holes of thick grey clouds. Glimmering off of houses that perspire through generations of brightly colored paint. I'm tired of the painting bone that holds these structures. If we paint the houses one more time, then I may look at them once again. This gray wall is standing well.
Storms are blowing on the horizon. Shapsifting is a generation of bright colored paint that is always farther and far away, and is shaking the house. Light drains from circles in the grey cloud. A mantle cuts in houses that perspire in generations of paint ablaze and colorful. Painting holding these structures huffing and suffering after bone use. I know that if these houses would get another layer of color then I could see them again fried with the walls of this gray.
The storm bubbles on the horizon. The shape moves around and far away. Light is poured out through the holes of thick grey clouds. The twinkling of a hard house. The generation of bright-colored paint. The paint that preserves these structures drains the bones and puffs. I know that if these buildings can find one more layer in the painting then I could just see them again a second time brilliant against this wall in grey.
Storm bubbles far on horizon. Deformation, always getting closer. Light is thrown through the holes of thick grey clouds. Sparkle home-sweat through several generations of bright colors. Paint that keeps these structures huffing and puffing with bones exhausted. I know that if these houses can get one more layer of paint then I might just see them once again standing brilliantly against this wall of gray.
Storm bubbles far on horizon. Deformation, always getting closer. Light rushes into holes of the fat grey clouds. A mantle cuts in houses that perspire in generations of paint ablaze and colorful. Paint that keeps these structures huffing and puffing with bones exhausted. I know that if these houses would get another layer of color then I could see them again fried with the walls of this gray.
The storm bubbles on the horizon. Deformation, always getting closer. Light is thrown through the holes of thick grey clouds. The sweaty house is brighter through several generations of brightly coloured paint. I'm tired of the painting bone that holds these structures. If we paint the houses one more time, then I may look at them once again. This gray wall is standing well.
Storms are blowing on the horizon. Shape-shifting to mobile, remote and far away. Light pours through holes in thick grey clouds. Glitters on houses sweat through generations of paint in bright colors. Paint that keeps these structures laughing at the bones. I know that if these houses can get one more layer of paint then I might just see them once again standing brilliantly against this wall of gray.
The storm bubble is far on the horizon. Shape shifting is always farther and far away. Light pours through holes in thick grey clouds. The glitter from the home, sweats through a lot of bright colors. The paint that preserves these structures drains the bones and puffs. I know that if these houses would get another layer of color then I could see them again fried with the walls of this gray.
Storms are blown on the horizon. The changed form moves timelessly. Light filtering through a hole in the thick gray clouds. A mantle cuts in houses that perspire in generations of paint ablaze and colorful. The color allows these structures to poke, inflate, and make the bones completely bored. I know that if these houses would get another layer of color then I could see them again fried with the walls of this gray.
The storm is scattered far on the horizon. Shape shifting is always farther and far away. The light passes through the thick gray clouds .The glitter from the home, sweats through a lot of bright colors. Painting holding these structures huffing and suffering after bone use. I'm tired of the painting bone that holds these structures, and I'm tired of these houses, and I'm going to see them again, and I'm standing on this gray wall, and I'm standing on this gray wall.
Storms are blown on the horizon.  Its always a transformation and a distant transformation. Light filtering through a hole in the thick gray clouds. Glitters on houses sweat through generations of paint in bright colors. Paint that keeps these structures laughing at the bones. I know that if these houses can be painted one more layer, then I might see them again close to the gray wall.
A storm is far away ball over-the-horizon. The shape moves around and far away. Light filtering through a hole in the thick gray clouds. Glimmering off of houses that perspire through generations of brightly colored paint. Paint maintaining this structure burnout with bones bloated. I know that if these buildings can find one more layer in the painting then I could just see them again a second time brilliant against this wall in grey. 
There is a storm on the horizon for dispersion into the distance. The shape moves around and far away. Light filtering through a hole in the thick gray clouds. The glitter from the home, sweats through a lot of bright colors. The color allows these structures to poke, inflate, and make the bones completely bored. I know that if these houses would get another layer of color then I could see them again fried with the walls of this gray. 